% Introduction

# What is Human Geography?

Geography, you may have come to believe, involves the study of maps
and the static and mundane facts they represent: rivers, capital
cities, international boundaries, etc. If geography ended there,
however, it would be as boring as history that was only about
important dates. Just as the significance of a historical perspective
lies in understanding how a sequence of events adds up to important
changes in the way we live our lives, the significance of geography
lies in understanding how the relationships across space shape our
lives. The study of human geography, then, is about people and place:
about where we live, work, and socialize, and how these local lives
are tied into distant worlds.

In an increasingly globally-connected world, the importance of human
geography becomes all the more important. The pace and scope of
geographic connections evident in our everyday lives is
unprecedented. We consume foods, drive cars, wear clothes, and listen
to music that are typically produced in distant places, and influenced
by still by other places. At a banal level, we can see the influence
of globalization all around us. If we walk down a street in many
places in the world, we can see a variety of so-called ethnic
restaurants. At a market, we buy foods that come from all over the
world, while Wal-Mart offers bargain-basement prices by making use of
cheap labor available in Southeast Asia and Central America. If we
move outward from and visit various points around the world, we will
also see similar evidence of globalization. From McDonald’s and
American popular culture, to the increasing accessibility of similar
images and information through global communications technologies,
there is a sense that our world is an increasingly small place.

But as the events of September 11, 2001 or the recent global economic
crisis show quite clearly, while we may indeed live in a global
village, it is also a fundamentally uneven and divided one. As the
world is made increasingly the same through processes of
globalization, I will argue in this course, local places—where we
actually live our lives—remain quite different. At the same time that
increasing numbers of people are part of an emerging global consumer
culture, vast numbers of the world’s population are mired in extreme
poverty. As many of us live lives of unprecedented comfort, many
others live lives marked by violence and indignity. The increasing
global and local connections of the 21st century are simultaneously
vulnerability and opportunity. Globalization is about both of these
two sides to the contemporary geography of the world.

# Basic Geographic Concepts

So how do geographers operationalize these concerns? Like other
disciplines, we use a set of concepts. In the following, I introduce
you to some of the basic concepts we use in human geography.

## Location

Perhaps the most basic concept in geography is _location_: simply and
most basically _where_ something is. But even this simple concept has
some nuances. Nothing of significance exists in a vaccuum, but rather
takes on significance by its relation to what surrounds it. This gets
at the distinction between _absolute location_ and _relative
location_. Absolute location refers to an objective description of
where something is that does not change depending on context; it is
the same _everywhere_. The most common way we describe such locations
is through [_latitude_ and _longitude_][latlong].

![This is an image of an absolute location marker for an historical
 monument in Kosovo, a place that people have fought over for
 literally centuries. While its absolute location is certainly
 significant, its relative historical location helps explain why it is
 memorialized in the first place. Photo courtesy Quinn Dombrowski](http://farm5.staticflickr.com/4151/5007446663_9f856d3937_b.jpg)

Relative location, by contrast, depends on context, and
perspective. If I say "the restaurant next to that coffee shop," the
location of that restaurant only has meaning in relation to something
else: the coffee shop. It is therefore a description of _relative
location_. We will come back to the importance of this in a minute.


## Distance

Distance can be described simply as the space between two
locations. But as with location, distance can also be described in
absolute and relative terms. In geography, we typically describe
absolute distance using units such as _miles_ and _kilometers_. As
with absolute location, the notion of an absolute distance does not
change depending on context. Ten miles is the same in Africa as it is
in Asia; the same in 500 BC as in 2010.

Relative distance, on the other hand, can change substantially
depending on historical and other context. Consider a question like
"how far is Cincinnati from Chicago?" In the 21st century, we tend to
implicitly assume a particular mode of travel when answering that
question: most likely a car, or potentially a plane, or even perhaps a
train. Each of those modes of transportation will take different time,
but the time will be measured in hours regardless. But consider if we
were to ask the same question in 1820? At that time, the most likely
mode of transportation would be horseback, and the time measured in
days. While the absolute distance does not change, the relative
distance does quite dramatically. In essence, in the 21st century,
Chicago is relatively much closer to Cincinnati than it was in 1820.

## Scale

We tend to use _scale_ in two ways in geography. The first, which we
will focus less on here, is as a [ratio in map-making][map-scale] to convert a
distance on a map to a (much larger) distance on the earth's
surface. The second way we use scale in geography is as a description
of the relative size of a pattern or process. In common language, the
following are all descriptions of scale:

  * global
  * regional
  * national
  * urban
  * neighborhood
  * street
  * body

When we use a term like _globalization_ to describe contemporary change,
we are really describing a change in the relative relations among
these geographic scales; perhaps implicitly suggesting that processes
operating at larger scales are taking increasing precedence over those
at smaller scales.

## Diffusion

So far, we have been dealing with fairly static concepts. Diffusion is
inherently dynamic, and about the movement over space of things
(ideas, practices and innovations, people, etc.) from one place to
another. Again: let's distinguish two ways to understand
diffusion. The most basic we can call _spatial diffusion_ or
_contagious diffusion_. This ideas describes a process where things
move much like a virus: from one place to a place that is absolutely
closest.

_Hierarchical diffusion_, by contrast, involves movement between
places that are most intensely connected. Consider, for example, that
there is massively more travel of people between Los Angeles and
Manhattan, than there is between a small town in upstate New York and
Manhattan, despite the fact that the latter two places are absolutely
much closer. Why? Well, one obvious factor is LA and New York are two,
very large, intensely-connected, cities.

In practice, though, in the 21st century, much diffusion involves both
hierarchical and spatial aspects. Ask yourself: how does the flu, or
new fashion styles, diffuse?

## Site and Situation

Last pair of concepts: _site_ and _situation_. _Site_ refers to the
objective physical characteristics of a place: its location, its
physical features, and so forth. _Situation_ refers instead to the
particular context a site exists in at any particular time. New York,
for example, exists at a particular latitude and longitude, at the
confluence of some major rivers, with a fantastic natural harbor. That
fact alone cannot explain why it has become the major global city that
it is. The natural harbor is mostly meaningless without the technology
of ships, and global trade that has, for the past few centuries, been
heavily-dependent on shipping.

# Basic Geographic Arguments

With these basic concepts in hand, we can begin with some basic
arguments:

1. all places are connected to other places, and therefore _interact_
with each other
2. nevertheless, the quantity and quality of interactions between places differs
substantially
3. places that are closer together, and therefore separated by
less relative distance, tend to interact more; those farther away tend
to interact less
4. the scales of connection we are exposed to on a daily basis today
are larger and more intense than they were in the past

[latlong]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geographic_coordinate_system

[map-scale]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale_(map)
